the title of the lecture is economics of
risk and
insurance um but probably more
appropriate title would be from uh
Health Care to
welfare give me let me give you a
brief explanation of how Insurance
functions and then go into more detail
as we as we go along um any type of
insurance in involves the the pooling of
individual
risks um it implies that to that to some
of the insured more will be paid out
than what they paid in um and that to
others less will be paid out than what
they paid um what they paid in
um some people pay an insurance premium
and nothing happens to them um others uh
do pay an insurance premium and
something does happen uh happen to them
um it is always necessary for insurance
that we have a group of individuals that
are pulled in a risk in a risk
pool um of utmost importance for
insurance is and I'm talking about how
insurance is on the free market would
work we will see that later on that
insurances in the real world are not
really insurance companies they are to a
large extent welfare
companies um what is important is that
no one of the people who ensures himself
against certain contingencies against
certain risks knows who a winner will be
and who will be a loser a winner would
be the person using now the terms as I
Define them a winner would be a person
who pays into the insurance and then is
hit by disaster we might not normally
refer to that as a winner but
nonetheless he actually got more out
than he paid in and a loser would be the
person who paid in it nothing happens to
him again in normal we would say what a
lucky guy but um in this case he is of
course a loser he paid in vain and
nothing nothing happened so very
important and I'll come back to that in
a few seconds very important is nobody
knows who will be a winner and nobody
knows who will be um a loser uh winners
and losers are distributed randomly so
to speak uh and the resulting income
redistribution there's obviously an
income redistribution the
winners uh get something and the losers
only pay and get nothing there's an
income redistribution the income
redistribution uh is unsystematic is
unpredictable um otherwise if the
winners or the losers could be
systematically predicted and I'll
explain that in a second in more detail
also uh then the losers would not want
to be uh insured or would not want to be
uh pulled as far as their risk is
concerned with winners but with other
losers um take an
example um let's say you take out
accident in
Insurance um and um you have uh
professional football players and uh
people like me sitting behind the desk
and facing the constant risk of their
chair breaking down and uh I'm myself uh
getting severely
injured um now if an insurance company
would go about and charge us the same
premium um then of course I would
certainly know uh that I must actually
subsidize the football players because
the risk of theirs to uh contract an
injury is significantly higher uh than
my own risk that is in this case we
could systematically predict who will be
the winner and who would be the loser
the football players would be the
winners and I would constantly um be a
loser um
such insurance as we'll see in a second
such practice would not last in the
market would not last for a
second um for the following reason
because there is competition between
insurance companies different insurance
companies offer uh their services and uh
this competition defined as I think
probably um Professor D Lorenzo
explained that as competition exist if
there's free entry if firms can freely
enter enter any line of production that
they um want to enter um competition
between insurers would eliminate all
systematic
redistribution um should it
somehow exist unless of course people
want to make a voluntary subsidy to
other people that is if an insurance
company would cover me and professional
football players in the same
group um but then um they would realize
and I would realize that actually we
should be classified into different
groups a new insurance company would for
instance say look uh by only insuring
people like Hans Hopper and excluding
professional football players or
grouping professional football players
into a different group than people who
sit behind the desk we can offer a lower
premium for people like me and we would
have to charge a higher premium to
professional football players and unless
I'm in love with professional football
players and want to support them out of
my out of the goodness of my heart um I
would of course then go for an insurance
company that would charge a lower rate
and the insurance company that misg
grouped people at the beginning that is
grouped us all together uh would lose
all the all the cases that have uh a low
in low risk uh such as me and keep only
maintain only those clients that fall
into the higher risk uh higher risk
group and would have to raise uh raise
insurance premiums for them and uh
follow suit to the other with the other
company and lower the rates that they
charge uh uh charge
me um
so competition sees to it that all
companies that misclassify people that
put you in raw in the wrong risk
groups um would be outco competed by
companies that place people correctly
into the right groups such that as a
result ultimately there is no
redistribution except random
redistribution of income among uh among
various people being insured against uh
against various uh various
risks um so this this competition
between insurance companies would then
lead to yeah they might initially group
people in a rather rough way and
competition would then see to it or
bring about the effect that a more
refined and refined subgrouping of
people will take will take place with
all people grouped in the same in the
same group uh facing so to speak the
same type of risk uh with no possibility
existing for people placed in the same
group picking in advance who will win
and who will uh who will
lose um the premiums the charged for
people placed in various groups would
then reflect the genuine Insurance risk
um and the price
differentials of various premiums um
would correctly reflect so to speak the
different uh degree of risk faced by
this group or faced by uh uh that group
and again as in all areas prices on the
average that is premiums paid to
insurance companies uh would tend to
fall as a result of people always trying
to reduce the cost of operation and then
passing lower cost of operation onto in
the form of lower prices onto consumers
just as in in all uh all other areas
insurance companies then very important
to realize
the the principle of the principle of
insurance companies is of course
discrimination um but discrimination
based on group risks uh the
Discrimination um distinguishing with
people falling that group or in that
group uh could be based on on Regional
criteria people living there or people
living here um that can be
um um would for instance for Hurricane
Insurance flood insurance obviously in
some on the top of the mountain you have
very little risk of uh flood insurance
for instance um or they could be the
Discrimination could be based on
biological
criteria these are women um these are
men uh these are children these are uh
elderly people um they could be on
genetic information that we have about
uh various people these type the people
have these types of uh chromosomes and
others have those and these types of
genes and other have those types of
genes and all the rest of it um they
could be based on on Race uh um but in
any case whatever the criteria are on
which people are
discriminated uh have so to speak an
objective basis the objective basis is
people who fall into this group have a
different group risk than people who
fall into a different group there's no
arbitrary discrimination going on in uh
in insurance
companies um so now I want to come to
the
question um what sort of
contingencies are insurable and uh what
contingencies are not insurable
what sort of surprises that can happen
to us are surprises against which one
can take out insurance and what sort of
surprises exist against which one cannot
ensure oneself but has to take care of
individually through individual
precautions for
instance um or put it differently does
this subgrouping people usually
classified in large groups and then in
smaller groups does the subgrouping ever
come to an
end um now BOS Knight that I mentioned
before and also Misa say um that this
subgrouping comes to a stopping point um
uh that there are certain things certain
surprises against which we cannot ensure
ourselves at
all um now in order for any non
redistributive risk pooling or grouping
to be possible the following condition
must be fulfilled and I give you a quote
of misus this is mises's definition of
what he calls class probability and that
coincides with what Knight calls risks
as compared to
uncertainty um they both make a
distinction uh on the one hand risk and
misus refers to that as class
probability and on the other hand
uncertainty and mises refers to this as
case
probability so for something to be
insurable the following condition must
hold um I that is the insurer and also
the insuring company must assume to
know with regard to the risk
concerned everything about the the
behavior of a whole class or group of
events but about the singular event or
the singular risk we know nothing but
that there are elements of this
class so we reach as a first temporary
conclusion Insight that we can only
ensure ourselves against risks that have
the character of a
Ence um something that cannot
be um predicted in individual cases but
can be predicted only for groups as a
whole now what follows from this then as
far as
uninsurable contingencies
uninsurable surprises are uh are
concerned um all events for which we can
say
uh I
know uh with regard to a particular risk
my risk your risk his risk some of the
things that influence the particular
risk whenever we are in such a position
where we know something about individual
risks those things cannot be
insured um it is
impossible to build
groups um
the group is then only a group of one I
know something about this particular
instance um in this case if I know
something about a particular instance
that makes the likelihood of a certain
event higher or lower then this falls
into the realm of individual
responsibility then I have to take care
of it myself I cannot take out insurance
and cover myself in um in this way now
what type of risks are of this kind
where we know something about
individual risks rather than group risks
those are all events or
contingencies that individuals through
their individual action can affect can
influence if I have the slightest
influence over the outcome or not
outcome of certain events then such a
thing is not
um me give you
some
um uh some examples of U of
this um we do have control over own
actions uh because of this every risk
that may be influenced by my own actions
is strictly speaking uninsurable I'm not
saying that insurance companies
currently adhere to this Principle as we
will see in a in a little while um and
uh if something that was not
controllable uh does become controllable
by individual choices by individual
actions then it stops being an insurable
uh event now with respect to risks of
the type of natural disasters for
instance floods hurricanes earthquakes
fires insurance is is possible those
have the character of accidents that is
we do not bring them about by our
choices we have no influence whether
they will occur or not occur whether we
will be hit by them or not hit by them
um I know nothing about my individual
risk that except that I'm a member um of
um of a certain group of individuals
which as a group is affected by an
objective uh risk frequency on the other
hand um take examples take risk like
suicide um can I ensure myself against
suicide um could an insurance company
ensure such an
event um and the answer is no this is
not possible because because of course I
have influence whether I kill myself or
not
um what would happen to an insurance
company that would insure people uh for
against contingencies such as this they
would attract of course all suicide
candidates um and then they kill
themselves and then the wives or
children would ever get millions of
dollars paid out and insurance company
that would abstain from such a thing
would instantly out compete them uh this
is not an insurable
event um take take an event like you can
ensure your
yourself against your house burning down
by accident but can you ensure yourself
against the risk of you yourself burning
your house
down um and then after you paid your
premium uh then going and okay build me
a new house I just burned it I just
burned it
down um that is not that is not an
insurable
event um because I have in this case I
have full control of whether this event
will happen or
not take
um uh take an event
like uh
unemployment now you realize we have
something that is called unemployment
insurance uh but the fact that certain
words are used in certain cases does not
mean that that is what it says it
is is unemployment an insurable event
the answer is of course it is not not an
insurable event because I have of course
complete control over whether I'm
employed or
unemployed um if I go and kick my boss
in in his behind and lose my job uh and
then I collect
unemployment this is not an insurable
event I can always accept so to speak a
lower wage if they tell me we have to
just dismiss you and I'm saying then I
can say yes of course I work for less
but if I'm not willing to work for less
then I will be unemployed it is not an
insurable event unless unless we say the
insurance company then has the right
immediately to assign you to a certain
task once you say I'm unemployed and
then they tell you but now you do such
and such and we will pay you such and
such amount for doing this sort of stuff
but simply saying unemployed I'm
unemployed this is unemployment is Not
an Accident uh it is not anything about
which you have no control
whatsoever can I Ure myself against
making business
losses that can I go to a company and
say insurance company say look I know
business losses can occur just to be
sure that I'm not in uh Dire Straits
once they occur I want to take out
insurance about uh against making
business
losses um the answer should should be
perfectly clear no insurance company
could ever do anything like this because
you can make deliberate
losses um it's like I produce a lousy
product uh or mistreat my
consumers um then I make losses or I'm
just St plain stupid um and make losses
then I cannot go to the insurance
company and say look uh everybody can
make losses um this is just an accident
that happened to happened to me just
like being struck by lightning and and
please now pay out after all I did pay a
premium last month uh so it cannot be
that cannot be done um so I would never
be in a position where I can say
um I know nothing about my personal loss
risk except that I as all other
businessmen are faced by the same group
loss risk um so as as if a loss were
something like being struck by lightning
that is not
possible um fractional Reserve banking
you have probably heard about that too I
will hear about this in other uh in
other lectures banks have
no take
deposits uh you have the right to redeem
your money at any time you want um but
the banks print up additional tickets
covered by
nothing um now can you ensure yourself
against Bank
runs resulting from the practice of
fractional Reserve Banking and the
answer is that's absolutely impossible
uh because I can of course make sure
that as a bank run is occurring if my
reserves are zero then definitely a bank
run will occur that is the higher my
reserves are the less likely is a bank
run the lower they are the more likely
is a bank run I have so to speak perfect
control over a bankr occurring or not
occurring if I have 100% reserves as a
deposit Bank no bankr can occur uh if I
have less than 100% reserves then of
course Bank runs can occur there is
Federal Deposit Insurance as you know
yeah but the same reason for this exist
as we have unemployment insurance
insurance sounds good uh but it has
nothing to do with insurance um why can
something like this offer be offered
that is whatever even if you up to
$100,000 or whatever the amount is uh
banks are allegedly insured if you are
allegedly insured up to $100,000 then
your incentive is to have no reserves
whatsoever and if a bank run occurs this
can only be dealt with not because
there's an insurance company doing this
but there is a government ready with
unlimited power to Simply print up the
necessary money uh if that would not
exist uh no insurance would ever take on
a risk like this this has again has
nothing to do with insurance whatsoever
uh it is just a euphemism for a
fraudulent uh fraudulent scheme that
exists in this case um can we ensure
ourselves against the risk of not
feeling good in the morning and getting
out of bed um the same thing I mean this
if I insure myself against this I will
never get out of bed uh on the other on
the on the other hand of course I do
have perfect control over whether I will
get out of it or uh or
not what that gets me to is to say that
as far as health insurance is concerned
there exist very very few things in the
realm of Health against which people
could be strictly speaking ensuring
themselves um because there are very
very few things that have strictly
speaking accidental characters and over
which we have no personal control most
of the health risks except of course
catastrophic accident and so forth most
of the health risk can be in influenced
by individual
choices
um this is hardly ever discussed in the
current debate about health
insurance um that there are most that
there are very very few things that
fulfill the characteristics of accidents
striking certain groups and most of the
health risks so to speak are risks about
which people have full or partial
individual control and because of this
fall into the realm of individual
responsibility one of the very few
people who has recognized this is is
mises let me just read you some quote
from um from his book socialism
published in 1922 before all of this
stuff became really uh popular uh
popular topics there he
says uh to the intellectual champions of
social insurance and to the politician
and Statesmen who en acted it illness
and health appeared as two conditions of
the human body sharply separated from
each other and always recognizable
without difficulty or doubt any doctor
could diagnose the characteristic of
health and illness was a bodily
phenomenon which showed itself
independent of the human will and was
not susceptible to influ influenced by
will now every statement in this theory
is false there is no clearly defined
Frontier between healths and illness
being ill is not a phenomenon
independent of conscious will and of
psychic forces working in the
subconscious a man's efficiency is not
merely the result of his physical
condition it depends largely on his mind
and will thus the whole idea of being
able to separate by medical examination
the unfit from the fit and from the
malingerers and those able to work from
those unable to work proves to be
untenable those who believe that
accident in health insurance could be
based on completely effective means of
ascertaining illnesses and injuries and
their consequences were very much
mistaken the destruction aspect of
accident and health insurance lies above
all in the fact that such institutions
promote accidents and illness hinder
recovery and very often create or at
least intensify and lengthen the
functional disorders which follow
illness or accidents just compare the
likelihood of self-employed people being
ill and incapable of working with people
who are employed and are insured as
employees um self-employed people work
under conditions um that would be
considered unbearable by most people who
are employed and have have insurance
that is in in health insurance in these
these types of things actually creates
creates illness laziness mingering and
so forth and it creates it precisely
because these types of events are not
insurable from uh from the very uh very
outset so what we would expect in a free
market is that most health risks um are
assumed individually that is and paid
out of individual uh savings and that
insurance would be limit to the accident
variety of risks that is to foreign
induced uh damage with strictly limited
uh uh coverage no dis no coverage of
course of uh newly discovered risks and
uh and precisely specified uh payments
generally in the form of Indemnity that
is Cash pay cash payments um um and
sometimes in in the form of ink kind um
Services now I have to move quickly here
I'm too late now if you look at the if
you look at the current world then you
find of course that the current world
has very little to do with what we would
expect to exist in the free market
um in the current world we have numerous
uninsurable risks that are covered by
insurances
um and we have many misg groupings of
people going on that would immediately
disappear in uh in the free market that
is yielding a systematic predictable
income redistribution from lower to
higher risk groups um coverage is
frequently undefined and is open-ended
and payments or service amounts are
likewise
unspecified um Now what is
what is the reason for this the reason
for this is insurance
regulations um in order to operate
insurance companies insurance companies
have to fulfill fulfill certain criteria
otherwise they simply cannot open shop
um I want to give
you a rough overview over some of the
crazy uh insurance regulations that
exist that Force insurance companies to
cover things that are uninsurable
strictly uninsurable and to mgroup and
to mgroup people um for instance State
mandates require and this is the numbers
are from 1991 so this is they're
probably far more there close to a
thousand mandates imposed on uh
insurance companies um insurance
companies are forced in almost all
states in the United States for instance
to to cover
alcoholism uh now it should be perfectly
clear not every person is is as likely
to be affected by alcoholism as every
other person uh but nonetheless all
insurance companies must cover people
who suffer from
alcoholism obviously it drives the
premiums up uh forces people who are not
affected by this sort of to pay for
those who suffer from this sort of thing
misg grouping um drug addiction in 27
States probably in the meantime far
higher drug addiction must be covered by
insurance companies uh chiropractors
must be covered psychologist must be
covered by 36 there are some people who
never go to a shrink and will never go
to a shrink nonetheless they must cover
the insurance compan must cover the cost
of this also and some people of course
love to go to
shrinks um so and have to pay of course
for those people who do you have control
over whether you want to go to a shrink
whether you feel you are shrinkable or
non shrinkable
course
um social workers in 30 in in in 22
States help by social workers has to be
covered um in uh in Illinois liver
transplants in Georgia heart transplants
again not all people are equally likely
of being affected by heart diseases uh
there are subgroups some people are far
more likely affected by others but
nonetheless it covers covers all of them
um very nice hair pieces in uh in in
Minnesota um that that would help people
like Bob Murphy for instance would not
have much would not have much of an
effect for me
um pastoral Counseling in in Vermont
sperm banking in in
Massachusetts uh um so if you if you
feel like your sperms have to be spread
around a little bit um then the the the
cost of this will be covered in some
places and those people who keep the
sperms for themselves or privately they
have they have to pay for other people
who feel that the world needs more of
them
um uh no AIDS related questions are
allowed in many states for instance um
that is you cannot an insurance cannot
ask what sort of Lifestyle people lead
if they are intervenous drug users and
so forth um uh in
California insurance companies cannot
perform any genetic test uh to determine
whether you belong into this group all
people are grouped grouped together
despite the fact that they know full
well that there are some people are
affected by such and such and some
people are affected by uh by such there
exists for instance CLE cell anemia um
that uh that is more frequent with uh
with black men than with whites then
there is this TX disease that occurs
more frequently with Jews than with
non-jews and so forth um so many types
of information are available that would
allow people to be grouped in different
groups insurance companies are not
allowed to do this despite the fact that
we know that they have different
different group uh group risks
um now these
mandates
um which force insurance companies to
cover things that are strictly speaking
uninsurable and to misg group uh misg
group people uh have of course a
dramatic Consequence the consequence is
that the prices of these things of go up
uh there's a this systematic income
redistribution so to speak from people
who uh who live healthy lifestyle so to
speak to people who live unhealthy
Lifestyles or people who belong to more
dangerous groups uh people belong to
less dangerous groups they support
systematically people who have uh higher
higher group risk what is the
consequence of this the consequence of
this is of course that many people
decide I don't want to be insured at all
now you hear always this complaint there
are so and so many people who are not
insured at all what is never pointed out
out is of course that this is for many
many people a perfectly rational
decision to take um if you know if I
take insurance I have to cover all sorts
of have to pay for all sorts of risk
that simply do not apply to me um then
at one point you say I do without it
entirely and the most I do is just
choose insurance for catastrophic uh
catastrophic events um that is uh being
hit by a car or uh falling off of a of a
cliff or something like this um
so the fact that we have uh millions and
millions of people uninsured is not
exactly an economic catastrophe it is to
a large extent a perfectly rational
decision on the part of the people who
say this is just too much I cannot
afford this sort of thing given the fact
that none of this applies to me and what
do they do then next and here we have
some an example of like how One
intervention leads to the next
intervention first the governments
intervenes in the in the insurance
Market by insurance regulations then the
prices prices go up prices go up people
drop out of it completely only the
higher risks remain in the pool of
people who are insured the lowrisk
people drop out of the insurance Market
entirely uh so what do you do then then
you make compulsory health insurance uh
which exist of course in many European
countries all people must be
insured um so if all people must be
insured what is then the next problem
that arises now of course prices will go
up prices will go up prices will go up
and what is then the last thing that
governments do then they begin rationing
Services um then they must then they
distinguish between uh good diseases and
bad diseases uh people who do get
treatment and people who don't get
treatment people who have to wait six
six years before they get treated
against such and such and other people
who get preferential treatment for
whatever disease they have and you know
of course what they do they have
politically correct diseases so to speak
and they are Politically Incorrect
diseases um whatever if if you have some
smoking related type of disease
you can wait until you die on on on the
on the other hand if you if you belong
to some favorite groups whatever AIDS
patients or something like this then
then entire hospitals will be rolled out
for you and you will be treated uh
treated on the spot everybody who knows
anything about the British healthc care
service or the Canadian healthcare
service knows knows how that is that
people then have to just go in order to
get treatment at all they have to just
go to other countries in order to get
the treatment Because treatment what
sort of treatment you get how the the
prices for various treatments are all
government regulated uh things rather
than uh phenomena that are decided on um
on the free on the free
market um let me end by again reading
you um reading you a quote
from um from misus
who as
in many many cases has seen all of these
things long before anybody else has seen
them they have it so Mis
says um the psychic forces which are
active in every living thing including
men in the form of a will to health and
a desire to work are not independent of
social surround ings certain
circumstances strengthen them and others
weaken them the social environment of an
African tribe living by hunting is
decidedly calculated calculated to
stimulate these forces the same is true
of the quite different environment of
the citizens of a capitalist Society
based on division of labor and on
private property on the other hand a
social order weakens these forces when
it promises that if individuals work if
the individuals work is hindered by
illness or the effects of a trauma he
shall live without work or with little
uh work and suffer no consequence very
and suffer very noticeable reduction of
his income matters are not so simple as
they appear to the native pathology of
the army or prison doctor social
insurance has thus made the neosis of
the insured a dangerous public disease
should the institution be extended and
developed the disease will spread no
reform can be of any assistance we
cannot weaken or destroy the world to
health without producing illness and
what we have currently is a system that
systematically produces illness and
disease by subsidizing it through
insurance regulations and this is what
under Obama and previously Hill Clinton
you will get more of of this type of
crazy instit tions that that breed uh
literally sickness uh instead of
strengthening the will of people uh to
to be healthy and uh and willing uh to
be to lead productive productive lives